Add Battery Article (#1262)
wpilibsuite/frc-docs: source/docs/hardware/hardware-basics/robot-battery.rst

Dropping the batteries can bend the internal plates, create bulges, or in the worst case - crack the battery case open. While we do use AGM [absorbant glass mat] technology for safety, when a cell is punctured it still will leak some liquid. This is why FIRST recommends teams have a battery spill kit available.

Finally, certain older battery chargers without "maintenance mode" features can *overcharge* the battery, resulting in boiling off some of the battery acid - another reason for a spill kit.

.. image:: images/robot-battery/boiled.jpg
  :alt: An FRC battery that was boiled by a high current dumb charger.

Damaged batteries should be safely disposed of as soon as possible. All retailers that sell large SLA batteries, like car batteries, should be able to dispose of it for you. They may charge a small fee, or provide a small "core charge refund", depending on your state law.

.. warning:: **DO NOT** attempt to "repair" damaged or non-functional batteries.

Battery Construction & Tools
-----------------------------

> Battery Leads

Author: I dislike how this plays with the lug section immediately following. 

More subsections? 
Maybe move the "Standard 6AWG..." line into Battery Leads as the subassembly description, then make each of Wire/SB/Lugs into subsections within that? Do we have a 3rd layer of subheadings I can use?

Reviewer: Yes from the [style guide](https://docs.wpilib.org/en/latest/docs/contributing/frc-docs/style-guide.html):
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/15695521/111081820-2645b300-84d3-11eb-88fe-93cae7534cac.png)

Author: I added sub-sub-sections... and then jammed a bunch more information in about heavy wire. 

I remembered that the KOP leads are *not* lugged, and left the lugs as their own sub-section.

.. include:: <isonum.txt>

Robot Battery
=============

The power supply for an FRC\ |reg| robot is a single 12V 18Ah SLA AGM battery, capable of high momentary currents.

SLA stands for Sealed Lead Acid, AGM stands for Absorbent Glass Mat.

The Robot Battery assembly includes a COTS battery, with positive and negative lead cables to an Anderson SB connector. The Red/Pink Anderson SB50 is STRONGLY recommended.

> Always start your match with a fully charged battery - ask for help if it looks like you won't!

Reviewer 2: I don't like the jumping around. Content needs to build off of itself. Either turn it into a bullet list, or reword the content to build off the previous statements. As it stands right now, each of these paragraphs is completely separate.

Reviewer: I agree I would move "The Robot Batter.." sentance to the Battery Leads section and the "Always start..." to best practices.

Author: Brought this into a single paragraph

.. include:: <isonum.txt>

Robot Battery
=============

> The power supply for an FRC\ |reg| robot is a single 12V 18Ah SLA [Sealed Lead Acid] AGM [Absorbent Glass Mat] battery, capable of high momentary currents in excess of 180A when fully charged. The Robot Battery assembly includes the COTS battery, lead cables with contacts, and SB connector.

Author: "In excess of 180" is derived from the drivetrain current budgeting example elsewhere in the docs, and I tend to use somewhere between 180A and 210A for peak drive load. 

If a wrench gets dropped across one, yeah it'll pull 100's of amps. 

Reminds me, probably worth inserting some warning language that batteries can't be turned off and will happily weld things across themselves.

> The power supply for an FRC\ |reg| robot is a single 12V 18Ah SLA [Sealed Lead Acid] AGM [Absorbent Glass Mat] battery, capable of high momentary currents in excess of 180A when fully charged. The Robot Battery assembly includes the COTS battery, lead cables with contacts, and SB connector.

Reviewer: Here is an excerpt from Al: "I have seen currents up to 500 amps pretty regular when we were testing.  If you think about it, the stall current on a CIM is 131 amps.  A four motor drive in stall could therefore draw 524 amps.  However, with wiring losses and speed controller efficiencies 110 amps is more likely so 440 amps is more than normal with a fully charged battery.  Remember the definition of a motor in stall is “current is applied but the shaft is not turning.”  That means that every time the motor is asked to start, it is in stall.  So a typical match can have stall current being drawn several (maybe 10) times a minute.  Normal current drain the rest of the time is likely 100-200 amps depending on drivetrain efficiency, turns and other robot functions."

If you want to keep 180 I would then do a normal high and a max end number like 500

> The power supply for an FRC\ |reg| robot is a single 12V 18Ah SLA [Sealed Lead Acid] AGM [Absorbent Glass Mat] battery, capable of high momentary currents in excess of 180A when fully charged. The Robot Battery assembly includes the COTS battery, lead cables with contacts, and SB connector.

Author: 440A at 0.020 mOhm is an 8 volt drop, putting us into brownout territory in every pushing match? 

Want to take a stab at rewriting the sentence? I'm kinda paranoid about wordcount on this paragraph

> The power supply for an FRC\ |reg| robot is a single 12V 18Ah SLA [Sealed Lead Acid] AGM [Absorbent Glass Mat] battery, capable of high momentary currents in excess of 180A when fully charged. The Robot Battery assembly includes the COTS battery, lead cables with contacts, and SB connector.

Reviewer: .02 should be the worst a battery is being used in a match.  I haven't done testing myself but when Al tells me something like this I believe him.  Doing a quick search of CD there are other references to 500A too so I think it is plausible, either way my point was the battery can and WILL pull way more than 180.

IMO just use 500

> The power supply for an FRC\ |reg| robot is a single 12V 18Ah SLA [Sealed Lead Acid] AGM [Absorbent Glass Mat] battery, capable of high momentary currents in excess of 180A when fully charged. The Robot Battery assembly includes the COTS battery, lead cables with contacts, and SB connector.

Author: This is "arcing over 500" currently

Battery Safety & Handling
-------------------------

**DO NOT CARRY A BATTERY BY THE CABLES**, and always avoid pulling by them.
Pulling on batteries by the cables may loosen, bend, or break the lug or battery tab -- or even tear the entire tab out of the housing!

.. image:: images/robot-battery/broken-terminal.png
  :alt: One terminal of an FRC battery fully detached from the battery.

Even if it doesn't get broken, the battery will not be able to provide the same amount of current if the :ref:`connectors are loose <docs/hardware/hardware-basics/preemptive-troubleshooting:Check Battery Connections>`.

> Dropping the batteries can bend the internal plates, create bulges, or in the worst case - crack the battery case open. While we do use AGM [absorbant glass mat] technology for safety, when a cell is punctured it still will leak some liquid. This is why FIRST recommends teams have a battery spill kit available.

Author: Fixed AGM & modified to "A small amount of battery acid"? 

"May leak hazardous chemicals" strikes me as more sinister and open ended than a bit of battery acid. Not clear why it would be gelled - the MK ES17-12 datasheet only says nonspillable AGM, implying that they have a liquid infused glass mat that would leak liquid acid, but anecdotes indicate gel type extcretions from some legal batteries? 

At the same time our high impact physical use case implies the use of gel technology for better anti-vibration performance , but if it's not on the datasheet they're probably not spending those pennies on us. Maybe there's a mix of AGM and gel type in circulation.

Higher strand count wire (sometimes sold as "Flex" or "welding wire") has a smaller bend radius, which makes it easier to route, and a higher fatigue limit. There is no strand count requirement, but 84/25 (84 strand "flex" hookup wire) and 259/30 (259 strand "welding wire") will both be *much* easier to work with than 19/0.0372 (19 strand hookup wire).

The insulation of the +12V wire must be red, and the ground must be black. There is no explicit insulation temperature rating requirement, but any blackened or damaged insulation means the wire needs to be replaced: off hand, 105C is plenty and lower will work for almost all robots. There is no insulation voltage rating requirement, lower is better for thinner insulation.

SB Connector
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Anderson SB Connector may be the standard Pink/Red SB50, or another Anderson SB connector. Teams are *STRONGLY* recommended to use the Pink/Red SB50 for interoperability: the other colors and sizes of housings will not intermate, and you will be unable to borrow batteries or chargers.

> Follow manufacturer's instructions to crimp contacts and assemble the leads into Anderson SB connectors. Teams are strongly recommended to use properly rated tools and stringent quality control practices for crimping processes (ask local veteran teams for help), or use vendor-made connectors. A small flathead screwdriver can help to insert the contacts (push on the contact, not on the wire insulation), or it can help to disengage the internal latch if the contact is in the wrong slot or upside down.

Author: I moved the "QUaLiTy" warning to Best Practices, which cleaned up both of the subassembly descriptions significantly. 

Which is fine, I and many others have gotten away with terrible crimps on low-demand robots.

.. image:: images/robot-battery/heatshrink.png
  :alt: One terminal of an FRC battery fully covered in heatshrink.

Battery Chargers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There are many good COTS "smart" battery chargers designed for 12V SLA batteries, rated for 6A or less per battery, with 'maintenance mode' features. Chargers rated over 6A are not allowed in FRC pits.

Chargers used at competition are required to use Anderson SB connectors. Attaching a COTS SB connector battery lead to the charger leads using appropriately sized wire nuts or screw terminals is fast and simple (be sure to cover any exposed copper with heat shrink or electrical tape). SB Connector Contacts are also available for smaller wire sizes, if the team has crimping capability.

..warning:: After attaching the SB, double check the charger polarities with a multimeter before plugging in the first battery.

Some FRC vendors sell chargers with red SB50 connectors pre-attached.

Battery Evaluation Tools
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Voltmeter** or **Multimeter**

> A voltage reading will give you a good snapshot of what the Voc (Voltage open circuit, or "float voltage") is. Anything from 13.0 to 14.0 may show up for charged batteries, but depends as much on the individual battery as it does on real state of charge. Below 13V, it's worth trying to charge it more.

Reviewer: This method is not recommended might be good here.

Author: Reworked this section to move the voltmeter to after both the battery charger and DS Log

If a battery shows significantly lower voltages at the higher test current loads, it may not be done charging, or it may need to be retired.

Understanding Battery Voltages
------------------------------

A "12V battery" is anything but 12V.

Fully charged, a battery can be anywhere from 13 to 14 volts open circuit (Voc). Open circuit voltage is measured with *nothing* connected.

Once a load (like a robot) is connected, and any amount of current is flowing, the battery voltage will drop. So if you check a battery with a Voltmeter, and it reads 13.5, and then connect it to your robot and power on, it will read lower, maybe 13.1 on the Driver Station display. Those numbers will vary with every battery and specific robot, see Characterization below. Once your robot starts running, it will pull more current, and the voltage will drop further.

Depleted batteries will read between 11.5 and 12.5 volts on an idle robot. While batteries can be run lower, it will risk permanent battery damage.

> (SLA battery voltage and current performance also depends on temperature: cool batteries are happy batteries.)

Reviewer: I don't think the ( ) are needed here. I think it can just be "Battery voltage and current...."

.. include:: <isonum.txt>

Robot Battery Basics
====================

The power supply for an FRC\ |reg| robot is a single 12V 18Ah SLA (Sealed Lead Acid) AGM (Absorbent Glass Mat) battery, capable of briefly supplying over 180A and arcing over 500A when fully charged. The Robot Battery assembly includes the COTS battery, lead cables with contacts, and Anderson SB connector.

Battery Safety & Handling
-------------------------

A healthy battery is **always** "On" and the terminals are **always** energized. If the polarities short together - for example, a wrench or aerosol can falls and bridges the gap between two bare terminals - all the stored energy will be released in a dangerous arc. This risk drives a wide range of best practices, such as covering terminals in storage, only uncovering and working on one terminal or polarity at a time, keeping SB contacts fully inserted in connectors, etc.

> **Do *NOT* carry a battery assembly by the cables**, and always avoid pulling by them. Pulling on batteries by the cables may loosen, bend, or break the lug or battery tab -- or even tear the entire tab out of the housing! Even if it doesn't get broken, the battery will not be able to provide the same amount of current if the :ref:`connectors are loose <docs/hardware/hardware-basics/preemptive-troubleshooting:Check Battery Connections>`.

Author: Right, that's why the sentence leads with loosen and bends, and then escalates to the torn off tab. 

I don't really have an allusion to fatigue life though. Shoehorn in "over time"? Or is that kind of orthogonal to what you're getting at?

> **Do *NOT* carry a battery assembly by the cables**, and always avoid pulling by them. Pulling on batteries by the cables may loosen, bend, or break the lug or battery tab -- or even tear the entire tab out of the housing! Even if it doesn't get broken, the battery will not be able to provide the same amount of current if the :ref:`connectors are loose <docs/hardware/hardware-basics/preemptive-troubleshooting:Check Battery Connections>`.

Author: **Do *NOT* carry a battery assembly by the cables**, and always avoid pulling by them. Pulling on batteries by the cables will begin to damage the lugs, tabs, and the internal connection of the tab. Over time, fatigue damage can add up until the the entire tab tears out of the housing! Even if it isn't clearly broken, internal fatigue damage can increase the battery internal resistance, prematurely wearing out the battery. The battery will not be able to provide the same amount of current with increased internal resistance or if the :ref:`connectors are loose <docs/hardware/hardware-basics/preemptive-troubleshooting:Check Battery Connections>`.

> **Do *NOT* carry a battery assembly by the cables**, and always avoid pulling by them. Pulling on batteries by the cables may loosen, bend, or break the lug or battery tab -- or even tear the entire tab out of the housing! Even if it doesn't get broken, the battery will not be able to provide the same amount of current if the :ref:`connectors are loose <docs/hardware/hardware-basics/preemptive-troubleshooting:Check Battery Connections>`.

Reviewer 3: That looks better to me.

Follow manufacturer's instructions to crimp contacts and assemble the leads into Anderson SB connectors. A small flathead screwdriver can help to insert the contacts (push on the contact, not on the wire insulation), or it can help to disengage the internal latch if the contact is in the wrong slot or upside down.

Battery Lugs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Compression lugs ("crimp lugs") for #10 bolt battery tabs (~0.2" hole diameter) are available online and through electrical supply houses, sold by the accepted wire sizes in AWG (or mm2) and post diameter ("bolt size", "hole diameter"). Higher end vendors will also distinguish between Standard (~19) and Flex (>80) strand counts in their lug catalogs. Follow manufacturer's instructions to crimp the lugs.

Screw terminal lugs are legal, but not recommended. If using screw terminal lugs, use the correct tip size screwdriver to tighten the terminal and check the terminal tightness periodically (at minimum, before each competition weekend,).

> Battery Lead Lug Connection

Author: "Battery Lead Lug To Battery Post Connection" is the wordiest and most correct. 

"Battery Lug To Post Connection" is shorter and still accurate.

.. include:: <isonum.txt>

> Robot Battery
> =============

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Robot Battery Basics
====================
```

Reviewer 2: Just "Robot Battery" does not stand out well in the ToC.

The power supply for an FRC\ |reg| robot is a single 12V 18Ah SLA (Sealed Lead Acid) AGM (Absorbent Glass Mat) battery, capable of high momentary currents well in excess of 180A when fully charged. The Robot Battery assembly includes the COTS battery, lead cables with contacts, and SB connector.

Battery Safety & Handling
-------------------------

> A healthy battery is **ALWAYS** "On" and the terminals are **always** energized. If the polarities short together - for example, a wrench or aerosol can falls and bridges the gap between two bare terminals - they will release all their stored energy in a big, dangerous arc. This risk drives a wide range of best practices: covering terminals in storage, only uncovering and working on one terminal or polarity at a time, only using Battery Leads as complete assemblies with SB contacts fully inserted, and covering the SB connector contacts with "battery tabs" once the Robot Battery is fully charged, among others.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A healthy battery is **always** "On" and the terminals are **always** energized. If the polarities short together - for example, a wrench or aerosol can falls and bridge the gap between two bare terminals, causing all stored energy to be released in a dangerous arc. This risk drives a wide range of best practices: covering terminals in storage, only uncovering and working on one terminal or polarity at a time, only using Battery Leads as complete assemblies with SB contacts fully inserted, and covering the SB connector contacts with "battery tabs" once the Robot Battery is fully charged, among others.
```

Caps are a bit excessive and overly aggressive. The bold is good enough. Additionally, I reworded a sentence.

This paragraph mentions SB, but it's never explained what SB is

Dropping the batteries can bend the internal plates, create bulges, or in the worst case - crack the battery case open. While we do use AGM [absorbant glass mat] technology for safety, when a cell is punctured it still will leak some liquid. This is why FIRST recommends teams have a battery spill kit available.

Finally, certain older battery chargers without "maintenance mode" features can *overcharge* the battery, resulting in boiling off some of the battery acid - another reason for a spill kit.

.. image:: images/robot-battery/boiled.jpg
  :alt: An FRC battery that was boiled by a high current dumb charger.

Damaged batteries should be safely disposed of as soon as possible. All retailers that sell large SLA batteries, like car batteries, should be able to dispose of it for you. They may charge a small fee, or provide a small "core charge refund", depending on your state law.

.. warning:: **DO NOT** attempt to "repair" damaged or non-functional batteries.

Battery Construction & Tools
-----------------------------

Battery Leads
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Standard 6AWG copper, Pink/Red SB50 battery leads often come in the Kit of Parts and are sold by FRC vendors.

> Lead cables

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Lead Cables
```

.. include:: <isonum.txt>

Robot Battery
=============

The power supply for an FRC\ |reg| robot is a single 12V 18Ah SLA AGM battery, capable of high momentary currents.

SLA stands for Sealed Lead Acid, AGM stands for Absorbent Glass Mat.

The Robot Battery assembly includes a COTS battery, with positive and negative lead cables to an Anderson SB connector.
The Red/Pink SB50 is STRONGLY recommended.

Always start your match with a fully charged battery - ask for help if it looks like you won't!

Battery Safety & Handling
-------------------------

Battery assemblies are **delicate**, even though they don't look like it.

**DO NOT CARRY A BATTERY BY THE CABLES**, and always avoid pulling by them.
Pulling on batteries by the cables may loosen, bend, or break the lug or battery tab -- or even tear the entire tab out of the housing!

.. image:: images/robot-battery/broken-terminal.png
  :alt: One terminal of an FRC battery fully detached from the battery.

Even if it doesn't get broken, the battery will not be able to provide the same amount of current if the :ref:`connectors are loose <docs/hardware/hardware-basics/preemptive-troubleshooting:Check Battery Connections>`.

> //TODO is this a good place to talk about locking down the SB50 so you don't pull on wire, or is that handled on Common troubleshooting?

Reviewer: We don't discuss why it is done anywhere but the battery holder is part of the standard kit.  To me this is self explanatory.

Author: Added it to "common troubleshooting"

Dropping the batteries can bend the internal plates, create bulges, or in the worst case - crack the battery case open.

> While we do use AGM [absorbant glass mat] technology for safety, when a cell is punctured it still will leak some liquid.

Author: Fixed in both documents

> This is why FIRST recommends teams have a battery spill kit available. //TODO add link?

Reviewer: I don't think we need a link to a spill kit.  IMO they are still a bit of safety theater compared to many of the other much more common injuries.

> Finally, certain older battery chargers can *overcharge* the battery, resulting in boiling off some of the battery acid - another reason for a spill kit.

Reviewer: If you are going to add this sentence we should remove the sentence below about "the picture above"

.. image:: images/robot-battery/boiled.jpg
  :alt: An FRC battery that was boiled by a high current dumb charger.

Most modern chargers can charge the battery indefinitely without additional harm.
The picture above is from a high current charger with no maintenance mode that boiled the acid until it produced steam and high pressure that opened the safety vents.
As such a modern smart charger is highly recommended.

Damaged batteries should be safely disposed of as soon as possible. All retailers that sell large SLA batteries, like car batteries, should be able to dispose of it for you. They may charge a small fee, or provide a small "core charge refund", depending on your state law.

.. warning:: **DO NOT** attempt to "repair" damaged or non-functional batteries.

Battery Construction & Tools
-----------------------------

Battery Leads
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Standard 6AWG, SB50 battery leads normally come in the Kit of Parts, courtesy of AndyMark. Teams are highly encouraged to use these leads.

> //TODO cite rules here

Reviewer: I don't think we need to cite the rule.

> The leads must be copper, minimum size 6AWG and maximum length 12" - there is no maximum size. Teams are recommended to use the standard 6AWG, it is sufficient for almost all robots.

Reviewer: You say use 6AWG twice despite the 900 article we are thinking about linking to suggests 4AWG wire.  I really think this much specification is overkill for this article.

Author: I dialed this back on edit. I want a rookie reading the battery page to know that their 6awg leads are just fine, thank you, and they don't need to go chase 4awg or 2awg performance until they know what they're doing.

The Anderson SB Connector may be either a standard PINK or RED SB50, or another Anderson SB connector such as the SB120. Teams are *STRONGLY* recommended to use the standard RED or PINK SB50 for interoperability, as the other color housings will not intermate and you will be unable to borrow batteries, chargers, or other equipment.
Terminals for the battery tabs are available online and through electrical supply houses, sold by the accepted wire size and the tab hole diameter, sometimes listed on catalogs as a "post diameter".

> Teams are strongly recommended to use either use properly rated tools and stringent quality control practices for the crimping process, or use vendor-made leads. //TODO do we talk about crimping anywhere that this should link to?

Reviewer: I made an issue for a crimping article we should eventually link here but that can be part of that document.

The terminals must not move after they are torqued.
It is a good idea to secure the lugs with either a #10 star washer or a nordlock washer system, in addition to a nylon locking nut.

Do not use the split ring lock washer, they do not increase joint strength.

..warning:: The lug and tab must be in direct contact, copper to copper: do not put a washer of any kind separating them.

This connection must also be wrapped for electrical safety; electrical tape will work, but heatshrink that fits over the entire connection is recommended.

.. image:: images/robot-battery/heatshrink.png
  :alt: One terminal of an FRC battery fully covered in heatshrink.

Battery Chargers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There are many good off the shelf battery chargers with 'maintenance modes' for 12V batteries. Teams are required to retrofit SB connectors onto chargers used at competitions. //TODO Cite rule

Battery chargers may use no more than 6A charging current at competitions - most modern smart chargers for 12V SLA batteries do not use more than 6A, but this rating is generally shown on the box. //TODO cite rule

Charging at lower amperages will avoid heat buildup, but take longer.

> Battery chargers must be retrofit to use SB50 connectors rather than stock clamp leads. //TODO cite rule

Reviewer: You mention this twice.  I don't know of any rule that specifies this but I agree that it is highly recommended.

Author: R34 this year

Author: It was R41 in 2019 tho

The simplest way to add an SB50 to a COTS charger yourself is to use the original charger clamps on a set of battery leads and then wrap each clamp in electrical tape.
SB Connector Contacts are available for smaller wire sizes, for a cleaner look, if the team has crimping capability.

> Vendors like AndyMark sell good chargers with SB50 leads pre-attached.

Reviewer: Not sure we should be calling out specific vendors.

Depleted batteries will read between 11.5 and 12.5 volts on an idle robot. While batteries can be run lower, it will risk permanent battery damage.

(SLA battery voltage and current performance also depends on temperature: cool batteries are happy batteries.)

Battery Characterization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A battery analyzer can be used to give a detailed inspection and comparison of battery performance.

.. image:: images/robot-battery/cba-graph.jpg
  :alt: Graph from a common battery analyzer plotting volts and AmpHrs for many different batteries.

It will provide graphs of battery performance over time. This test takes significant time (roughly two hours) so it is less suited to testing during competition. It is recommended to run this test on each battery every year to monitor and track its performance. This will determine how it should be used: matches, practice, testing, or disposed of.

At the standard 7.5 amps test load, competition batteries should have at least a 11.5 amp hour rating. Anything less than that should only be used for practice or other less demanding use cases.

> Most teams do not have Battery Analyzer setups.

Reviewer: I don't think this comment is needed

Battery Longevity
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A battery is rated for about 1200 normal charge/recharge cycles. The high currents required for an FRC match reduce that lifespan to about 400 cycles. These cycles are intended to be relatively low discharge, from around 13.5 down to 11 or 12 volts. Deep cycling the battery (running it all the way down to less than 6 volts) will damage it.

Batteries last the longest if they are kept fully charged when not it use, either by charging regularly or by use of a maintenance charger. Batteries drop roughly 0.1V every month of non-use.

> Batteries need to be kept away from both extreme heat and cold. This generally means storing the batteries in a climate controlled area, such as a classroomn closet, rather than a shipping container in a parking lot.

Reviewer: climate controlled area is fine I don't understand why we need these extra examples of what a climate controlled area is.

Author: This guide is for high schoolers. I don't expect a high schooler to know that a classroom closet and a shipping container that they physically experience as temperate in the fall winter and spring are Significantly Different for battery storage over the summer.

Author: Maybe this is also a California Experience thing - our only remotely harsh climate is hitting >100F a few times over the summer, the rest of the year is ~50F-80F. So I wouldn't expect my high schoolers to notice or think about that a parking lot container gets extra hot in the summer while they're not on campus, whereas I've had pvc pipe components deform on me in the central valley when stored in a closed container on a jobsite.

Battery Construction & Tools
-----------------------------

Battery Leads
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Battery leads must be copper, minimum size (cross section) 6 AWG (16mm2, 7 SWG) and maximum length 12", with red or black insulation matched to polarity, and an Anderson SB connector. Standard 6AWG copper leads with Pink/Red SB50 battery leads often come in the Kit of Parts and are sold by FRC vendors.

Lead Cables
~~~~~~~~~~~

Tinned, annealed, or coated copper is allowed. Do not use CCA (copper clad aluminum), aluminum, or other non-copper base metal. The conductor metal is normally printed on the outside of the insulation with the other cable ratings.

Wire size 6AWG is sufficient for almost all robots and fits standard SB50 contacts. A small number of teams adopt larger wire sizes for marginal performance benefits.

Higher strand count wire (sometimes sold as "Flex" or "welding wire") has a smaller bend radius, which makes it easier to route, and a higher fatigue limit. There is no strand count requirement, but 84/25 (84 strand "flex" hookup wire) and 259/30 (259 strand "welding wire") will both be *much* easier to work with than 19/0.0372 (19 strand hookup wire).

> The insulation of the +12V wire must be red, and the ground must be black. There is no explicit insulation temperature rating requirement, but any blackened or damaged insulation means the wire needs to be replaced: off hand, 105C is plenty and lower will work for almost all robots. There is no insulation voltage rating requirement, lower is better for thinner insulation.

Author: Corrected. Also posted to the team slack that WE CAN DO BLACK & YELLOW BATTERIES

SB Connector
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Anderson SB Connector may be the standard Pink/Red SB50, or another Anderson SB connector. Teams are *STRONGLY* recommended to use the Pink/Red SB50 for interoperability: the other colors and sizes of housings will not intermate, and you will be unable to borrow batteries or chargers.

Follow manufacturer's instructions to crimp contacts and assemble the leads into Anderson SB connectors. A small flathead screwdriver can help to insert the contacts (push on the contact, not on the wire insulation), or it can help to disengage the internal latch if the contact is in the wrong slot or upside down.

Battery Lugs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Compression lugs ("crimp lugs") for #10 bolt battery tabs (~0.2" hole diameter) are available online and through electrical supply houses, sold by the accepted wire sizes in AWG (or mm2) and post diameter ("bolt size", "hole diameter"). Higher end vendors will also distinguish between Standard (~19) and Flex (>80) strand counts in their lug catalogs. Some vendors also offer right angle lugs, in addition to more common straight styles. Follow manufacturer's instructions to crimp the lugs.

Author: We're explicitly on the battery assembly side, here, so it's very simple to keep this at 'follow instructions, this vocabulary will help you read a catalog page', and I am intentionally vague about "sold by wire size range they accept". 

I really don't want to get into "This is the WPILib Method to Run 4AWG" because any discussion of using larger gauge wire gets into Engineering Judgment at the SB50 & PDP immediately.

> Compression lugs ("crimp lugs") for #10 bolt battery tabs (~0.2" hole diameter) are available online and through electrical supply houses, sold by the accepted wire sizes in AWG (or mm2) and post diameter ("bolt size", "hole diameter"). Higher end vendors will also distinguish between Standard (~19) and Flex (>80) strand counts in their lug catalogs. Some vendors also offer right angle lugs, in addition to more common straight styles. Follow manufacturer's instructions to crimp the lugs.

Reviewer 3: Fair enough, I don't think there are many 6AWG lug that don't fit so that seems fine.

.. warning:: After attaching the SB, double check the charger polarities with a multimeter before plugging in the first battery.

Some FRC vendors sell chargers with red SB50 connectors pre-attached.

Battery Evaluation Tools
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Battery Charger**

If your battery charger has Maintenance Mode indicator, such as a GREEN LED, you can use that indicator to tell you whether you are READY. Some chargers will cycle between "CHARGING" and "READY" periodically. This is a "maintenance" behavior, sometimes associated with the battery cooling off and being able to accept more charge.

**Driver Station Display and Log**

When the robot is plugged in and connected to the driver station laptop, the battery voltage is displayed on the NI Driver Station software.

After you finish a driving session, you can :ref:`review the battery voltage in the Log Viewer. <docs/software/driverstation/driver-station-log-viewer:Using the Graph Display>`

**Voltmeter** or **Multimeter**

> A voltage reading directly at the battery will give you a snapshot of what the Voc (Voltage open circuit, or "float voltage") is in the "Unloaded" state. Anything from 13.0 to 14.0 may show up for charged batteries, but depends as much on the individual battery as it does on real state of charge. Below 13V, it's worth trying to charge it more, but in general this is not a recommended method for understanding battery health: the open circuit voltage is not as useful as the combination of internal resistance and voltages at specific loads provided by a Load Tester (or Battery Analyzer).

Author: Dropped to 12.7.

**Load Tester**

A battery load tester can be used as a quick way to determine the detailed readiness of a battery. It may provide information like: open-load voltage, voltage under load, internal resistance, and state of charge. These metrics can be used to quickly confirm that a battery is ready for a match and even help to identify some long term problems with the battery.

.. image:: images/robot-battery/beak.png
  :alt: Output screen of a common load tester showing properties of the battery.

Ideal internal resistance should be less than 0.015 Ohms. The manufacturer specification for most batteries is 0.011 Ohms. If a battery gets higher than 0.020 Ohms it is a good idea to consider not using that battery for competition matches.

If a battery shows significantly lower voltages at the higher test current loads, it may not be done charging, or it may need to be retired.

Understanding Battery Voltages
------------------------------

A "12V battery" is anything but 12V.

> Fully charged, a battery can be anywhere from 13 to 14 volts open circuit (Voc). Open circuit voltage is measured with *nothing* connected.

Author: Fixed

Once a load (like a robot) is connected, and any amount of current is flowing, the battery voltage will drop. So if you check a battery with a Voltmeter, and it reads 13.5, and then connect it to your robot and power on, it will read lower, maybe 13.1 on the Driver Station display. Those numbers will vary with every battery and specific robot, see Characterization below. Once your robot starts running, it will pull more current, and the voltage will drop further.

> Depleted batteries will read between 11.7 and 12.5 volts on an idle robot. Try to swap the batteries before they start reaching brownout safety thresholds, as frequently entering low voltage ranges risks permanent battery damage.

Author: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/315847359_Modeling_and_Validation_of_12V_Lead-Acid_Battery_for_Stop-Start_Technology

It might be 80% on a flooded car battery, but doesn't indicate much over 50% on sealed gel/agm. 

Anecdotally, our robots are difficult to drive below 12.5V - but I also encourage aggressive gearing in our custom drives, and bone stock kitbot should be fine down to 12. 

This is why Voc is not recommended for understanding battery health ;-)

> Depleted batteries will read between 11.7 and 12.5 volts on an idle robot. Try to swap the batteries before they start reaching brownout safety thresholds, as frequently entering low voltage ranges risks permanent battery damage.

Author: I will die on the hill that 12.5v is an acceptable upper replacement threshold ;-p

> Depleted batteries will read between 11.7 and 12.5 volts on an idle robot. Try to swap the batteries before they start reaching brownout safety thresholds, as frequently entering low voltage ranges risks permanent battery damage.

Reviewer: I agree that 12.5 is a good number.  I think the important thing here is the voltage that teams should be checking for before a match and I think we should make it very clear (we do) that starting with less that 12.5 is just a bad idea in most cases.

> Depleted batteries will read between 11.7 and 12.5 volts on an idle robot. Try to swap the batteries before they start reaching brownout safety thresholds, as frequently entering low voltage ranges risks permanent battery damage.

Reviewer 3: That chart you linked shows 12.5V at ~70% SoC. That is certainly lower than the generic red-yellow-green charts you get when googling and does seem to match up closer with some manufacturer charts. 50% SoC is a better spot for battery life than what I originally suggested, perhaps bumping down to 12.3 per the paper you cited?

> Depleted batteries will read between 11.7 and 12.5 volts on an idle robot. Try to swap the batteries before they start reaching brownout safety thresholds, as frequently entering low voltage ranges risks permanent battery damage.

Reviewer: Maybe instead of "Depleted batteries will read between 11.7 and 12.5 volts on an idle robot." we could say:
"Batteries reading less than 12.5V on an idle robot should not be used for a match"

> Depleted batteries will read between 11.7 and 12.5 volts on an idle robot. Try to swap the batteries before they start reaching brownout safety thresholds, as frequently entering low voltage ranges risks permanent battery damage.

Reviewer 3: I'm fine with either 12.3 or the direction Jason proposed.

> Depleted batteries will read between 11.7 and 12.5 volts on an idle robot. Try to swap the batteries before they start reaching brownout safety thresholds, as frequently entering low voltage ranges risks permanent battery damage.

Author: Updated to match Jason's wording

- Teams should consider purchasing several new batteries each year to help keep their batteries fresh. Elimination matches can require many batteries and there may not be enough time to recharge.

.. image:: images/robot-battery/battery-cart.jpg
  :alt: A wooden bookcase like cart for storing and charging batteries.

- A multi bank battery charger allows you to charge more than one battery at a time. Many teams build a robot cart for their batteries and chargers allowing for easy transport and storage.

- It is a good idea to permanently identify each battery with at least: team number, year, and a unique identifier.

- Teams may also want to use something removeable (stickers, labeling machine etc.) to identify what that battery should be used for based on its performance data and when the last analyzer test was run.

.. image:: images/robot-battery/battery-flag.jpg
  :alt: A battery flag is just a small piece of plastic that fits in the battery connector.

- Using battery flags (a piece of plastic placed in the battery connector) is a common way to indicate that a battery has been charged. Battery flags can also be easily 3D printed.

> - Handles for SB50 contacts can be purchased or 3D printed to help avoid pulling on the leads while connecting or disconnecting batteries.

Reviewer 3: I would mention here that the battery should still not be carried by these handles.

.. image:: images/robot-battery/broken-terminal.png
  :alt: One terminal of an FRC battery fully detached from the battery.

Dropping the batteries can bend the internal plates and cause performance issues, create bulges, or even crack the battery case open. While most FRC batteries use Absorbent Glass Mat [AGM] or Gel technology for safety and performance, when a cell is punctured it may still leak a small amount of battery acid. This is one of the reasons FIRST recommends teams have a battery spill kit available.

Finally, certain older battery chargers without "maintenance mode" features can *overcharge* the battery, resulting in boiling off some of the battery acid.

.. image:: images/robot-battery/boiled.jpg
  :alt: An FRC battery that was boiled by a high current dumb charger.

Damaged batteries should be safely disposed of as soon as possible. All retailers that sell large SLA batteries, like car batteries, should be able to dispose of it for you. They may charge a small fee, or provide a small "core charge refund", depending on your state law.

> .. warning:: **DO NOT** attempt to "repair" damaged or non-functional batteries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. danger:: **DO NOT** attempt to "repair" damaged or non-functional batteries.
```

Battery Lugs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Compression lugs ("crimp lugs") for #10 bolt (or M5) battery tabs (~0.2" or ~5mm hole diameter) are available online and through electrical supply houses, sold by the accepted wire sizes in AWG (or mm2) and post diameter ("bolt size", "hole diameter"). Higher end vendors will also distinguish between Standard (~19) and Flex (>80) strand counts in their lug catalogs. Some vendors also offer right angle lugs, in addition to more common straight styles. Follow manufacturer's instructions to crimp the lugs.

Screw terminal lugs are legal, but not recommended. If using screw terminal lugs, use the correct tip size screwdriver to tighten the terminal. Check the terminal tightness frequently because they may loosen over time.

Battery Lead Lug To Post Connection
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A #10 or M5 nut & bolt connect the battery lead lug to the battery tab.

.. warning:: The lug and tab must directly contact, copper to copper: do not put a washer of any kind separating them.

.. image:: images/robot-battery/tab-contact.jpg
  :alt: One terminal of an FRC battery with socket head bolt and nylon locking (nylock) nut.

> Some batteries come with tab bolts in the package: they may be used, or replaced with stronger alloy steel bolts. It is a good idea to add a lock washer, such as a #10 star washer or a nordlock system, in addition to a nylon locking ("nylock") nut. Using a split ring washer will not add to joint strength or reliability and is not required even if one is provided with your battery.

Reviewer 2: > Using a split ring washer will not add to joint strength or reliability and is not required even if one is provided with your battery.

This sentence is long and awkward.

Author: Broke into pieces, thanks :)

Bolt-on crimp lugs with 0.2" tab holes (compatible with #10 bolt) battery tabs are available online and through electrical supply houses, sold by the accepted wire size and the tab hole diameter, sometimes listed on catalogs as a "post diameter". Use a size that matches the lead wires.

Teams are strongly recommended to use properly rated tools and stringent quality control practices for crimping processes, ask local veteran teams for help, or use vendor-made crimped leads. *Bolt-on screw terminal lugs are not recommended for battery leads.*

Battery Lug Connection
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A #10 or M5 nut & bolt connect the battery lead lug to the battery tab.

..warning:: The lug and tab must directly contact, copper to copper: do not put a washer of any kind separating them.

These connections must be very tight for reliability. Any movement of the lug while in operation may interrupt robot power, resulting in robot reboots and disconnections lasting 30 seconds or more.

> Some batteries come with tab bolts in the package: they may be used, or replaced with stronger alloy steel bolts. It is a good idea to add a lock washer, such as a #10 star washer or a nordlock system, in addition to a nylon locking ("nylock") nut. Using a split ring washer will not add to joint strength or reliability and is not required even if one is provided with your battery.

Author: >Using a split ring lock washer will not add...

Standing here in MechE land, split ring "lock" washers are the devil's fastener. They are shown in research papers to help joints fall apart under vibration.

Yet in the "common troubleshooting" article, we say "use the split ring lock washer at the PDP main lug"? Which I suppose is helpful in making sure students actually tighten the connection, rather than thinking the Fancy Electrical Thing is too fancy to get torqued down hard.
